Use of Generative AI in education at Karlstad University - guidelines for teachers and students The purpose of these guidelines is to support teachers and students in the way they approach and use Generative Artificial Intelligence (GAI) tools. Guidelines for teachers • Use the GAI tools provided via Karlstad University since these have undergone a risk and vulnerability analysis. • By being curious and experimenting with the tools, you will learn more about the way GAI tools work. • Experience and knowledge of GAI can help prepare students for their future careers. We therefore encourage you to explore how GAI can be used in your teaching. The Centre for Teaching and Learning (UPE) offers support and guidance. • Feel free to use GAI as support in your teaching, for example, to create a draft for a case or exam assignment. However, you must never use confidential information (e.g., the final version of an exam assignment) as input data in a GAI tool. • Remember not to use copyrighted information or personal data in the tool. If you are unsure about what constitutes copyrighted information or personal data, you can turn to the university library or the university's legal officers for support and guidance. • The course coordinator/examiner decides if and how GAI can be used during an exam. • Update exam instructions regarding permitted aids during the course exam. • Provide information orally and in writing at the start of the course and in connection to the exam whether it is permitted to use GAI at the exam. Give examples of permitted and prohibited use of GAI. • Remember that permitted GAI tools must be available to all students in the course. Course components involving costs for the students should be kept to a minimum. • Ensure that the course exam complies with applicable laws and regulations. Oral exams and on-campus written exams could be used as an alternative/complement to take-home exams/written assignments. Review and revise the course syllabus if necessary. • Prevent prohibited and misleading use of GAI during exams. The university library and UPE offer advice and support on how different course structures can prevent unwanted behaviour, as well as informing about the importance of evaluation of sources, ethics, copyright, information security and correct referencing. • Only use the digital plagiarism checker provided by the university. • If there are grounds for suspicion that a student has used prohibited aids, you as a teacher are obligated to submit a report to the disciplinary board. More information about the process of disciplinary matters: Disciplinary committee and disciplinary matters on Inslaget. Guidelines for students • Use the GAI tools provided via Karlstad University since these have undergone a risk and vulnerability analysis. • GAI tools are not always permitted aids during exams. For exams where GAI is permitted, there may be restrictions, for example, regarding which tools that can be used and how. It is your responsibility to find out what applies to the course you are taking. • Always use GAI in a way that increases your knowledge and understanding of the course content and supports your learning. • When submitting an assignment, you must state in which contexts you have used GAI and in what way. • If you use GAI tools in the writing process, in the production of images or other graphical elements, or in data collection and data analysis, you must be transparent about such use in a methods and/or materials section (or similar section). As a student at Karlstad University, you are fully responsible for all content that you produce. • Never use GAI in a way that is not permitted. Teachers are obligated to report to the disciplinary board if there are grounds for suspicion of cheating/use of prohibited aids. If you are unsure about what constitutes permitted use and prohibited use, you can contact the course coordinator. • Make use of all of the support you need during your time as a student. You are always welcome to contact the university library, student health services (e.g., if you are experiencing stress and anxiety in connection to your studies), language support service as well as other units and functions of the university. 