Advancing knowledge and technology is one of the key objectives of pursuing
postgraduate study and conducting innovative research. The mismatch between the
speed by which knowledge and technologies evolves compared to that of regulations
and policies has raised several concerns in the academic and research communities.
Accordingly, it is important to strike a balance between the benefits and risks of
adopting and adapting emerging knowledge and technologies.
Generative artificial intelligence (AI) is one of the recent advances that has been
evolving much faster than most organizations can comprehend and control.
Generative artificial intelligence (AI) uses machine learning (ML) to respond to prompts
inputted by the user. Several technologies have emerged over the last few years
including, for instance, the text generator ChatGPT and the image generator DALL-E
2, and Stable Diffusion.
Recently, the use of generative AI in education, and more specifically, in research, has
raised a great concern in academia from both ethical and scientific perspectives. Some
recent efforts have emerged to attempt to develop policies, regulations, and guidelines
for the various academic stakeholders (researchers, students, faculty staff) to ensure
that the use of generative AI in academic does not violate the norms and standards
that have been long established and enforced.
This document represents the first attempt for the Faculty of Computers and Artificial
Intelligence- Cairo University (FCAI-CU) to develop its policy for using generative AI
technologies in teaching and research. In doing so, this living document serves as
initial guidelines that will be adopted for the Academic Year 2023-2024. New versions
will be issued as the technology matures and we gain more understanding of the
benefits and risks of using generative AI in education. This document is based on
various guidelines and policies developed at Stanford, Toronto, and Deakin University.2. Policy Development Approach
FCAI-CU, as in all international academic institutes, is keen to progressively develop
its policy and regulations for using generative AI in teaching and research. As it
progresses, the policy should not prevent innovative use and exploration of the
potential of generative AI in teaching and research; while at the same time ensures
highest academic standards and adherence to FCAI-CU code of ethics and research
regulations.
To this end, this document serves as a set of guidelines for using generative AI in
teaching and research at FCAI-CU. While this initial version is being adopted at FCAICU, regular feedback will be collected from all stakeholders on the use of the
guidelines. In addition, we will continue to monitor and analyze polices and regulations
that evolve in worldwide academic institutes. Eventually, a new version of this
document will be released in the near future followed by continuous improvement
cycles to evolve the document as novel technologies evolve over time.
3. Key Guidelines for Using Generative AI in Teaching and Research
The following are the key initial guidelines for using generative AI in teaching and
research in FCAI-CU for postgraduate studies.
3.1 Scope of the Guidelines
These guidelines applies to all courses taught at postgraduate level including
diplomas, Master, and Doctorate programs. It applies to coursework, projects,
research proposals, and thesis and dissertations, and related scientific publications.
For scientific publications, researchers will need to consult the publisher policy for any
further regulations imposed on the use of generative AI and related technologies.
3.2 Coursework
 Instructors are free to decide whether to allow or prevent the use of generative
AI in their courses. Instructors shall clearly indicate in course syllabus the rules
they see appropriate for the use of generative AI in the various activities of the
coursework.
 In the absence of clear instructions on the use of generative AI in the
coursework, the use of such tools should be treated as an assistance from
another person and evaluated based on the regular policies and regulations for
such case.
 In all cases, students are responsible for clearly understand the course policy
on using generative AI. When they are in doubt, students must ask their
instructors for clarification.
 Students should acknowledge the use of generative AI using the suggested
citation in Section 3.4 below.
3.3 Research Proposals, Thesis, and Dissertations
The bottom-line, any use of generative AI tools at any step in the process of graduate
thesis research, writing, and publication must always take place with full transparency
and in adherence to the norms and highest standards of research ethics, intellectualproperty, and accountability. The following key guidelines represent the minimum
expectations for graduate researchers at FCAI-CU when using generative AI tools in
their research.
 Supervisors must agree in advance how any generative AI tools will be used at
any stage of the thesis/dissertations development. Such agreement must be in
writing using unambiguous statements and well-defined scope of use. The
original approval document shall be kept in the student file at postgraduate
office with clear timestamp log for the document generation.
 If the use of generative AI tools is approved by supervisor(s), it must be clear
to the student what evidence they need to provide to demonstrate their own
contributions and how they made use of any AI tools, and how their work will
be assessed by the supervisor and committee.
 Unauthorized use of generative AI tools for scholarly work shall be treated as
research misconduct, and hence, police and regulations for academic research
misconduct will be applied.
 Students are fully responsible for contents generated by AI that they decide to
include in their thesis. Students must be able to explain and defend any use of
generative AI, as well as the contents of the thesis during their
thesis/dissertation defense.
 Any use of generative AI tools must be appropriately acknowledged (See
Section 3.4 for more details). This includes the use of generative AI tools in
searching, designing, outlining, drafting, writing, or editing the
thesis/dissertation, or in producing audio or visual content for the
thesis/dissertation, and may include other uses of generative AI.
 students working with sensitive types of data (e.g., confidential information
related to specific areas or industry partnership, human/individual data) are
responsible for the risk of using such data with third party generative AI tools If
such data is revealed or disclosed. Students must take appropriate measures
to protect the data and/or obtain written approvals from relevant stakeholders
before submitting the data to the third party tools.
 Supervisors are highly discouraged to give permissions to their students to use
generative AI tools in writing their thesis/dissertation. This is because learning
the practices of scientific scholarly writing is crucial for graduate students. The
use of generative AI tools could adversely impact the development of these
writing skills.
3.4 Referencing Guidelines
The following guidelines are adopted from Deakin University guide on referencing:
 Provide details of the owner/publisher of the AI tool and the year of publication.
You might also provide further details of how you used the AI tool, for example
a transcript on inputs/outputs, in an appendix.

