GCU guidance on appropriate use of generative AI by students for
Education purposes, November 2023
Purpose
The purpose of this paper is to provide guidance for students on appropriate and inappropriate use of
artificial intelligence (AI) during their studies, in the context of the University’s existing policies and
procedures1.
Principles
Glasgow Caledonian University has accepted and adopted the Russell Group Principles on the use of
generative AI tools in Education. These state that:
1. Universities will support students and staff to become AI-literate.
2. Staff should be equipped to support students to use generative AI tools effectively and
appropriately in their learning experience.
3. Universities will adapt teaching and assessment to incorporate the ethical use of generative AI
and support equal access.
4. Universities will ensure academic rigour and integrity is upheld.
5. Universities will work collaboratively to share best practice as the technology and its application
in education evolves.
To contextualise these to our specific learning and teaching environment, we have also approved
following principles:
• Inappropriate use of AI is a breach of the Student Code of Conduct.
• Appropriate use of AI is likely to be contextual to programmes of study and specific modules.
• AI detection tools are unreliable and unlikely to be effective.
• AI is a sectoral / societal opportunity and challenge, with best practice emerging over time.
This paper aims to provide guidance on what, in general, will be seen as appropriate and inappropriate
use of AI by students – both in terms of general learning and teaching, and in terms of assessment. This
is a non-exhaustive guide, rather than a stipulation, to help support students and staff navigate the
effective and appropriate use of AI.
AI in Learning & Teaching
Generative AI has transformative potential in learning and teaching. Students and staff are therefore
encouraged to experiment with, and learn from, the use of these tools to support active and
collaborative learning as identified in the Strategy for Learning. Students may wish to use AI for
formative purposes, to enhance their understanding in conjunction with traditional learning practices. In
general terms, it is legitimate for students to use AI in ways that are akin to existing support already
provided by the University and use of existing tools such as web-based search engines etc. Examples of
appropriate and inappropriate student use are provided below in Table 1.
1 Policies and procedures | Glasgow Caledonian University | Scotland, UK (gcu.ac.uk)Example Appropriate Use Inappropriate Use
Lectures Using AI as a formative tool to
augment and develop understanding
from lectures.
Relying solely on AI for information. This is
because AI may provide inaccurate and out of
date information.
Written work Generating ideas, such as a list of
topics.
Providing feedback on written work.
Experimenting with different tones of
voice.
Providing examples of how to
structure a piece of written work e.g.
report.
Submitting AI generated content as own work.
Trusting AI-generated lists of publications and
other sources. Often these may be inaccurate
or simply not exist. AI may provide useful
pointers but should be used in conjunction with
established literature search tools.
Problem-based
learning
Providing technical assistance, such as
instructions on how to use R, Excel,
PowerPoint, etc.
Providing feedback on whether all
aspects of data interpretation were
explored.
Accepting AI generated answers without
verification.
Copy and pasting AI questions and answers.
Quizzes and
Exams
Generating practice questions for selfassessment.
Using AI to generate answers for submission.
Seminars /
Tutorials
Creating scenarios to help students
contextualise or augment their
understanding.
Gaining insight into topics by using AI
as a critical friend.
Copying answers instead of students
attempting problems themselves.
AI replacing student active participation in
discussions.
Practicals / Labs Assisting in troubleshooting.
Understanding protocols and
experimental design
Using AI to answer questions without
understanding or reflecting
Planning and
Self-directed
study
Using AI to assist in project planning
and timings.
Using an AI tool to restructure or
change the format of existing learning
resources to aid personal study. This
can be beneficial for accessibility
Relying uncritically on AI to structure planning.
Using a generative AI tool to restructure or
change the format of existing learningreasons and to suit personal
preferences.
resources and sharing them with others
without permission from the creator2.
Table 1: Summary of appropriate and inappropriate use of AI for students
AI in Assessment
It is not appropriate for students to submit work which passes knowledge, argument, or content of
another off as their own work. This is akin to the use of a ghost writer or an essay mill, as articulated
within the Student Code of Conduct. Beyond this, the following guidance applies for students:
Appropriate Not Appropriate
Using AI as a resource, like a search engine, to
explore a topic or question.
Trusting AI to provide factual content. Always
cross check with other search tools to establish
validity.
Including AI generated content without
appropriate acknowledgement and
contextualisation
Using AI as a critical friend to discuss ideas. Not acknowledging the use of AI as a co-creator /
collaborator
Using AI to augment knowledge and information
from class.
Using AI as the main source of information.
Table 2: Specific student guidance on AI and Assessment
Data Protection
Students must comply with data protection legislation when using generative AI tools. The university
provides comprehensive information on its data protection web pages, including specific student
guidance on data protection and processing personal data. Students should not, for example, upload
intellectual property to be used to train generative AI tools without appropriate consent from the
creator or exemption to copyright. It is important that students are aware that when subscribing to use
generative AI tools, it will be necessary to provide personal data for account registration purposes and
for more general use of the technology. Prior to sharing personal data, it is recommended that all
students review the privacy notices and policies provided by generative AI tool providers to understand
how personal data may be used and protected when shared with the provider.
Artificial intelligence technology is developing at an exponential rate. Increasingly sophisticated
language processing applications are available, such as ChatGPT, that can provide fast and credible
answers when asked questions on a variety of topics. The latest versions can also produce not just
text but also visual content including videos, graphs and images. In a remarkably short period of
time, AI tools are having a considerable impact in society, the world of work and, in particular,
education. The full implication and potential use of such tools are not yet fully known.
At GCU we are actively exploring contemporary AI tools to better understand the exciting potential
that they offer to deepen students’ learning and their benefits to the world of work. However,
unless an assessment explicitly states that AI tools can be used, then their use is considered
academic misconduct as it is a form of Ghostwriting.
This guidance is being issued to remind all students that all work submitted for assessment must be
the student’s own work. In other words, it must be original and not generated by AI (unless
authorised by your lecturer).
If you are considering using AI tools please be aware that:
• If you submit coursework that has been developed using AI tools then your work will not be
original and you will be engaging in academic misconduct. The Student Code of Conduct
which can be accessed here makes this clear.
• AI tools often keep a copy of all materials that you share with them so do not share sensitive
information, or confidential data.
• The answers given by AI tools are not always accurate; they can provide misinformation (AI
hallucinations) and make up references that do not exist and easily picked up on.
• We acknowledge that AI tools have the potential to be used in a developmental way to help
student learning, however, it cannot be used to generate text for coursework and other
assessment submissions.
Important resources
The following video has been developed by students highlighting the importance of responsible use
of AI: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=0CV-JwYjIFw.
More information on academic integrity can be found on our webpages – including a link to
our online Don’t Cheat Yourself resource, which highlights examples of good academic practice and
how to avoid engaging in academic misconduct, more commonly known as cheating. The resource
has been updated to include information on ChatGPT/AI.
Don’t Cheat Yourself!
