Recently, the world has seen a rapid development of Artificial Intelligence (AI) technology,
and one that is now dominating our discussion is what is known as ChatGPT. This resource
provides a guide for you as a teacher to understand what this is and its implications for your
teaching.
What is ChatGPT?
An AI tool that uses natural language processing techniques to respond to user-generated
prompts.
Put simply: You ask ChatGPT a question or provide a prompt, it replies using natural
language.
Screenshot of ChatGPT prompt and response
What can ChatGPT do?
▪ Write essays
▪ Write lesson plans
▪ Write course outlines
▪ Write learning objectives
▪ Design quiz/test questions
▪ Write a script for a podcast or video
▪ Design a rubric
▪ Provide directions for a learning activity
▪ Write emails to students
▪ Write computer code and more...3
What can ChatGPT NOT do? (yet)
▪ Write a self-reflection
(e.g., "describe how the content we covered in class last week shifted your thinking
about your role as a current/future teacher").
▪ Write about anything that happened after 2021
As ChatGPT is not connected to the internet, it does not learn from current events
or any content after 2021.
▪ Provide non-text based responses
(e.g., "design an infographic, interactive Google Map, TikTok-style video, meme,
multimodal timeline"). Note: ChatGPT can still help with writing a script for a
podcast or video or crafting the text to go in an infographic, meme, poster, timeline,
etc...
▪ Make accurate and correct references to articles (Refer to “Trustworthiness”)

Make predictions about future events

What can I do as a teacher?
Before you hastily consider banning technology from your classroom in favour of traditional
forms of assessment such as handwritten essays and oral exams (not that there’s anything
wrong with those methods, but they might lead to more student anxiety) consider how this
tool might help you rethink teaching and learning.
Instead, you might...
▪ Update your course outline
▪ Talk with your students about academic integrity. You may consider a declaration
statement to ensure accountability and honesty for student submissions
▪ Redesign your assessment
▪ Encourage risk-taking, productive struggle, and learning from failure
▪ Be transparent about assessment
▪ Reconsider your approach to marking
▪ Shift from extrinsic to intrinsic motivation

What else do you need to know about ChatGPT?
Beware of Privacy
OpenAI (the company that designed ChatGPT) collects a lot of data from ChatGPT users.
The privacy policy states that this data can be shared with third-party vendors, law
enforcement, affiliates, and other users.
While you can request to have your ChatGPT account deleted, the prompts that you input
into ChatGPT cannot be deleted. If you, or your students, were to ask ChatGPT about
sensitive or controversial topics, this data cannot be removed.
TIP: Before asking your students to use ChatGPT (if you plan to do so), please read over
the privacy policy and allow them to opt out if they do not feel comfortable having their
data collected and shared as outlined in the policy.
Be careful of Trustworthiness
You need to be discerning of the information being churned out:
▪ ChatGPT is not always trustworthy.
▪ ChatGPT was trained using a massive dataset of text written by humans that was
pulled from the Internet.
▪ Thus, the responses can reflect the biases of the humans who wrote the text used in
the training dataset.
▪ Currently ChatGPT is not connected to the Internet and the data used to train it
was collected prior to 2021.6
▪ According to the FAQs, ChatGPT “has limited knowledge of world and events after
2021 and may also occasionally produce harmful instructions or biased content”
(Natalie, para. 4).
▪ ChatGPT makes stuff up!
▪ To make up for knowledge gaps (e.g., lack of training data to pull information from),
ChatGPT will provide a response to the best of its ability (often made up) rather
than say “error” or “cannot compute.”
See “How to Talk to ChatGPT, the Uncanny New AI-Fueled Chatbot That Makes a Lot of
Stuff Up” (Ropek, 2022).
EXAMPLE
ChatGPT provided the APA reference list below for a prompt about professional learning
networks (PLNs). The first and last citations are NOT real articles (they do not exist!). The
middle two are real articles (but not actually related to PLNs).
References:
Boud, D., & Molloy, E. (2013). Personal learning networks: Using social media to support
professional learning. In S. Merry, & M. Smith (Eds.), Professional learning through
communities of practice (pp. 47-59), Springer.
Bryk, A. S., & Schneider, B. (2002). Trust in schools: A core resource for improvement.
Educational Leadership, 60(3), 40-45.
Ertmer, P. A., & Ottenbreit-Leftwich, A. T. (2012). Teacher technology change: How
knowledge, confidence, beliefs, and culture intersect. Educational Technology Research and
Development, 60(6), 623-644.
Veletsianos, G. (2016). Navigating and participating in online professional learning networks.
In G. Veletsianos (Ed.), Emerging technologies in distance education (pp. 105-123),
Athabasca University Press.
Asking students to use ChatGPT provides free labor to OpenAI
ChatGPT is in its infancy. It will continue to become a more intelligent form of artificial
intelligence...with the help of users who provide feedback to the responses it generates.
Do you really want to ask your students to help train an AI tool as part of their education?
Read the article: ChatGPT and Good Intentions in Higher Ed by Autumm Caines.Does Turnitin detect AI-generated text?
In recent months, Turnitin has integrated its AI detection capabilities. In addition to the
Similarity Report, and AI writing report will also elicited that determines the degree to
which a student may have used AI technology for assignments.
Read the Turnitin’s AI Writing Detection Capabilities for more on this.
Is submitting AI-generated text considered cheating?
There is no definitive answer whether AI-generated text is considered cheating; that will
differ course by course. Most teaching staff assume that any written work that a student
submits is written personally by that individual. Students may believe that it is acceptable to
use text generated by AI that they proofread and revise as they are making a contribution
to the end-product through their editing.
Because this is an area without a clear answer, schools should set clear guidelines for
whether AI-generated text is acceptable in their course. Refer to the “What can I do as a
teacher?” section for examples and resources on updating your course outline and
discussing academic integrity with your students.
Does the university policy on academic integrity say anything about
student submission of AI-generated text?
No, at this time, the USP policy on academic integrity and cheating does not address student
submission of AI-generated text. If you want to prohibit students from submitting AI-
generated text in your course, consider adding language to your course outline or
assessment parameters addressing it.
